It's really, really hard to be stressed
out and full of wonder at the same time.
And I'll prove it to you. In this video,
I sit down with a woman and we talk
about how cultivating wonder reduces
stress. And we do a superficial
experiment at first. And then we do a
deeper experiment later on in the video.
And I invite you to do the experiments
with us because this gets it to be in
your body, not just in your mind. And it
can totally change your relationship
with stress.
So, take a moment. Close your eyes.
Take a breath.
All right. I want you to imagine that
you are in a jungle and you hear
something in the woods just like behind
you. You hear some rustling. You look
over and it is a tiger. And it is a
[__] massive tiger. It is huge.
It is coming at you. It's You can smell
it. It's starting to run. You can feel
its feet land. It's such a big tire. You
start running as hard as you can. You
are running as fast as you can, but it's
catching up to you. It's going to get
you. You know that this is your time to
die. You're This is it. It's coming for
you. You're about to [__] feel it
pounce. And now I just want you to
wonder how much it weighs.
It's a crazy thing that our brain has a
really hard time holding fear and stress
when we're in wonder,
when we are in awe of life or anything.
And it's what makes people really
capable of seeing different points of
view and coming up with great solutions
to problems is to be in wonder, to have
an open mind,
and to be in awe of the world. So, this
is how it works. Partially, it's because
you can't really be defensive if you're
in wonder. So, somebody comes up to you
and they say,
"You're an complete asshole." And if
you're in wonder, the answer is, "Oh,
how is that? How do you see that?"
There's nothing to defend.
You're actually starting with a
question, which immediately makes the
other person feel heard. Wait, I just
called you an [__] You're supposed
to fight with me. And you're you're not
taking this personally. You're what?
You're asking me questions. How is that
possible? This is I mean I I know you've
learned some of this anyways in the
connection course when we talk about
wonder. But the the thing is is that it
just immediately takes the pressure, the
stress out of your system. And it also
takes the pressure and stress often, not
all the time, but often out of the
people around you. So wow, that's a lot
less stressful. The people around you
are less stressful. you're less
stressed, there's less for you to
defend. Even def being defensive is
quite a stressful act. If you think
about any time that you've been
defensive, it's not like I was just
relaxing while being defensive with
somebody, you know, just never happens.
So, it's an incredibly useful thing. But
most importantly is that it's just
really, really hard for your brain to be
in wonder and to be in fear. Wonder and
stress at the same time.
And so often times when we're in a
stressful situation and we're trying to
solve a problem, which is usually what
our brain tells us we need to do when
we're stressed, how do I
work out more to how do I solve this big
how do I market the thing? How do I get
this thing done that I don't know how to
do?
One of the best ways to figure that out
is to be in wonder. So, it's not well
the way to work out is to go to the gym
every it's oh I wonder what exercise
would be the most enjoyable exercise.
What would be the exercise that I could
do that I would want to do so bad that I
would get up off of Tik Tok to go do it?
How do I find out what that exercise
that's all questions that come from
wonder?
How do I have a marketing campaign that
makes me feel more connected to the
people we're selling to and then feel
more connected to me? Those are all
questions that are answered by wonder
instead of, oh, I know I have got these
six things to do that everybody tells me
to do in the marketing campaign and I
make my web page like this.
Wonder is the thing that opens up the
the aperture to life
and it solves the problems that you
think you need to resolve when you're
under stress. And it immediately
neurologically in your brain right now
changes your stress to
how much does the tiger weigh?
In this experiment, you're going to need
a pen and a paper. And it's really
simple. You're going to write down the
thing that's stressing you out the most
right now.
Whether it's
something at your work or something in a
relationship or anything you can think
of that is creating a lot of stress for
you.
And I want you to write down
15 things. 15 things that you don't know
about it. Stuff that you have no idea
about. So if it is your relationship and
you're fighting with your wife, then
what's the experience like for her is
something you don't know anything about.
Or
what's the neurological causation of
fights is another one. Or what's the
thing that you're actually scared of
happening? What are you fighting for
exactly?
What what does your ego have to do with
fight? So, whatever it is that you have
no idea about regarding the fight or
about the business problem or about the
problem with your boss or about your
boss or whatever the stress is, I want
you to write down 15 things that you
know nothing about regarding this issue.
And when you're done writing those 15
things,
then you're going to write one question
that begins with how or what around each
one of those things. So, if you don't
know what your boss is really trying to
get you to do, what is my boss trying to
get me to do? Or if you don't know how
your wife feels about the marriage, then
you can say, I wonder how my wife feels
about our marriage. And so, just write
those questions down
and be in the wonder of those questions.
Pause the video. Go ahead and do that.
Okay, now that you're playing the video
again and you have that list of
questions
about things you don't know anything
about, notice what's happened to your
stress.
Notice the action items that you didn't
have before that you have now. Notice
what questions you can ask of different
people to allow you to solve this
problem.
This is how powerful wonder is in
regards to stress.
[Music]
When I was a kid, my dad was, you know,
in the teenage years, not a great father
to say the least, right? Alcoholism,
abusive, verbal abuse. It was just
horrible. And there was this necessary
step that I had to take to separate
myself from my father.
I had to take some steps where he was
the bad guy and I was oppressed by him
so that I could create enough separation
so I could find myself or start to find
myself.
But at some point that anger at my
father
prevented my healing. So separating
myself and being angry at him was a very
necessary step. And also
learning to forgive and love him was a
necessary step for me to be able to
actually be authentic and to be myself.
And when I was learning to forgive and
love him, the first opening, the first
thing was curiosity, was wonder. And
that wonder was about what was happening
with my father, what what was his
childhood like? How did this all go
down? And then after that wonder started
opening up then I started to try to find
out what reality actually was. What
what's actually happening with my dad? I
had a whole bunch of preconceived
notions. He was trying to control me.
Blah blah blah. But I really wanted to
get in touch with what was real. And
that was the second step. And then the
third step was to do experiments
to say, "Oh, if I treat my dad like
this, what happens? If I treat my dad
like that, what happens?" And that just
naturally
came into a welcoming and a loving.
There was also something in there with
the experiments of boundaries that was
really important. What were the
boundaries I was going to draw with my
father and his alcoholism that would
allow me to maintain
myself enough to be able to stay in
wonder and to stay in curiosity? So this
is the exact same steps that you would
take for stress. So first, how do you
create enough separation?
Take a vacation,
get enough sleep, whatever you can do to
create enough separation where wonder
can open up. The wonder about stress can
be on an intellectual level. Oh, I
notice when I have these thoughts,
stress increases or decreases or I
notice that when I talk to myself in
this way, stress increases or decreases.
So, it can be an intellectual wondering.
There's also a really important sematic
wondering. Oh, right here. Here stress
is happening to me. What happens in my
body if I resist it? What happens in my
body if I tell it to [__] off? What
happens in my body if I try to enjoy it
or what is it exactly that's happening
in my body? Where is it exactly in my
body? So that all that wonder
sematically and intellectually really
important and the the the first steps
and then some like I said some
boundaries are going to be necessary,
right? And so those boundaries are going
to be
something my phone use right when I wake
up creates stress. So I'm not going to
use my phone for the first 15 minutes of
the day. Or
eating crap food before bed makes me
feel stressed in the morning. So I'm not
going to do that. And you're looking for
any of those things that can that you
can actually activate on with with
relative ease that can reduce that. Now
you're wondering about what's actually
true for the stress
where it came from like I I could with
my father. And so how much is the stress
trying to care for you? How much of the
stress is trying to hurt you? What's the
purpose of it? How did it learn to come
into existence? What's its background?
You're tracing through your system
how this whole thing came into
existence.
And you can notice even right now in
your body when you think about that
there's a settling that happens of the
stress just to oh what's what's going on
here? And so that's the next step in it.
And as you do these experiments, what
you'll start to notice is oh when I love
stress it's really effective.
It's really wow this is really effect I
love it and it changes and it's feels
seen and and then with that happening
more and more you'll just notice that
the love naturally show shows up
naturally you start loving the stress
there's a couple eddies or backwaters
that you can go into that are really
important to know the first one is and
almost everybody does it they realize oh
if I can love and welcome stress then
stress starts easing starts going way
and so then they start loving and
welcoming stress to make it go away and
then it stops working because if you're
loving something to go away you're not
[__] loving it anymore and so and so
if you find yourself in that place
recognize oh I'm doing this as a form of
management and when I manage it it
doesn't managing stress like that
doesn't actually help stress be seen or
feel fully felt in the body there's no
wonder in it anymore and so it stops
working and so the other backwater that
you can go into is that you can try to
jump to loving stress. Okay, Joe, I
heard you say blah blah blah blah. I'm
just going to skip all this wonder and
curiosity thing and I'm going to go
whack. I'm going to just go to love
stress.
But love doesn't work like that. You
know, it works like that with babies,
thank goodness. You know, you just
immediately love a baby. But if you feel
oppressed by something,
you it's very very very difficult to
love. You can't just force yourself into
loving it. So, you have to be mad at it
for a while. You have to resist it like
I said a little while ago and then you
have to allow that wonder to open up.
So it's really hard to just force the
love especially if you feel oppressed.
So so that's those are the two
backwaters. But in general, the the main
component of loving something is to just
let it unfold
through wonder and exploration and
experimentation
and and just really try to understand
what's happening and then that slowly
turns into love through experimentation
of oh how how does it react if I relate
to it like this? How does it react if I
relate to it like this? And that can
happen either in your body or that can
happen just experimenting out in the